<head>
  <title>Year 9 HASS: Politics</title>
</head>

# Practice Essay

## Question: *Evaluate the extent to which Australia and Myanmar uphold the principles of Justice and Freedom.*


Introduction
> Myanmar has been slowly transitioning to democracy since its colonial times. Ever since the nation gained independence from the British, it has adopted a parliamentary democracy, which was in power until the Military Coup. After decades of military dictatorship, the nation has had a recent transition to democracy, led most notably by Aung San Suu Kyi and her National League for Democracy. Despite this, it can be said that Myanmar does not follow the key liberal frameworks as closely as is the case in Australia. Through this text, clear evidence will be shown for this statement, focusing mainly on the frameworks of Justice and Freedom.

Body Paragraph 1 - Justice in Australia
> Justice is one of the key liberal frameworks of a democracy, and is demonstrated through the implementation of the Rule of Law and the Right to a Fair Trial. Rule of Law refers to the notion that no one is above or below the law. In Australia, this has been upheld in many different cases, for example, the Dual Citizenship Case of 2017. After 7 parliamentary members were suspected to be ineligible for their positions, they were removed from parliament. This shows that despite having significant power, ministers are still required to abide by the law and are subject to the same laws as someone who does not have as much authority or influence. The other main element of justice within a democracy is the right to a fair trial. This is achieved when all people are posed as equals before court and are entitled to a fair and public hearing. In Australia, the right to a fair trial is respected and upheld, and every trial is publicly posted as a hansard on the official parliamentary website. Hence we can say that Justice is upheld in Australia more than it is undermined.

Body Paragraph 2 - Justice in Myanmar
> In Myanmar, the framework of Justice is not as clearly demonstrated through the actions of the nation’s government. As mentioned earlier, Rule of Law is the idea that no one is above or below the law. We see that this is not the case in the Burmese government, as the military junta has a strong hold over both the constitution and the common law. In fact, the current constitution was scripted by the military in 2008, and ensures that the military always remains in power. The other main aspect of justice is, as stated before, the right to a fair trial. It can be said that this aspect was undermined in Myanmar through the example of the case of Wa Lone and Kyaw Soe Oo, two Burmese journalists. They were found guilty of entering prohibited places, taking images, and obtaining secret documents that may be useful to enemies. However, the two journalists both say that they were handed the documents by the police. Whilst clear evidence of their claims were given, the Court sentenced both of them into 7 years of hard labour, which was cut short when President Win Myint pardoned them as part of a mass amnesty. Despite the pardon, this case highlights the injustice present within the courts of Myanmar. The judges did not listen to Wa Lone and Kyaw Soe Oo when coming to their initial verdict, and instead sentenced them to a severe punishment. Using these examples it is safe to say that Justice is undermined in Myanmar more than it is upheld.

Body Paragraph 3 - Freedoms in Australia
> Freedom is defined as having the right to make one’s own decisions and accept the consequences for those actions. Example freedoms and rights include freedom of religion, and freedom of speech, which will be explored in this text. Australia allows its citizens to freely choose their religion and not be persecuted for doing so. It has a diverse population and is home to multiple different religious groups that all coexist peacefully. Other rights include the right to protest, freedom of association, and the right to political communication, which have been demonstrated time and time again. An example of this would be the Student Climate Protests, a series of regular protests held during school hours organised by high school students around the world, where many rights and freedoms were exercised. This exemplifies that the framework of freedom is upheld in Australia today.

Body Paragraph 4 - Freedoms in Myanmar
> Unlike in Australia, in Myanmar, there is evidence of religious persecution, particularly against followers of Islam. Myanmar is a predominantly Buddhist country and has been shamed internationally for its treatment of the Rohingya people, an Islamic people group. The Rohingya are refused citizenship by the Burmese government and have only been able to register as temporary citizens. The ‘free’ and ‘fair’ elections in 2015 did not contain a single candidate of the Muslim faith and as such, the Rohingya have been fleeing Myanmar to countries such as Bangladesh and Malaysia. Despite this, the government has rejected accusations of ethnic cleansing and genocide. As we looked at earlier with the case of Wa Lone and Kyaw Soe Oo, any reporters working on this story were persecuted against, leading to the manipulation of the media and the loss of freedom of speech, which further supports the initial thesis. Through these examples, it can be said that the framework of freedom is undermined in modern day Myanmar.

Conclusion
> Despite efforts to transition to democracy in Myanmar, Myanmar does not follow the key liberal frameworks as closely as is the case in Australia. As mentioned multiple times earlier, the country has a long way to go in terms of Justice and Freedoms. There is clear evidence of a lack of competency to uphold such frameworks, such as through the Wa Lone and Kyaw Soe Oo case and the Rohingya Crisis. Until the nation can solve such issues, it cannot be considered a full fledged democracy, despite how it appears to the international community.
