<head>
  <title>Practice Essay Two</title>
</head>

# Prac Essay Two

## I have no life

Myanmar is a southeast Asian country that has attracted international attention in recent years for its transition to democracy underneath the reign of peace activist Aung San Suu Kyi. The nation is predominantly Buddhist, with most people living around Yangon, and has a young population, with most people being under the age of 15. Ever since the nation gained independence from the British, it has adopted a parliamentary democracy, which was in power until the Military Coup. After decades of military dictatorship, the nation has had a recent transition to democracy, led most notably by Aung San Suu Kyi and her National League for Democracy. This text will focus on the period after 2011, which marks the beginning of a transition to democracy. However, despite the efforts the nation has taken, it can be said that Myanmar does not uphold the key liberal frameworks as well as it undermines them. Through this text, clear evidence will be shown for this statement, focusing mainly on the frameworks of Power, Legitimacy, and Justice. Power as a liberal framework is defined as having a method in place to define and limit the powers given to certain parties. Legitimacy refers to having the appropriate authority to rule a country, i.e., having a high degree of support from the people. Finally, Justice is achieved when all citizens are treated equally with respect, and is upheld through the Rule of Law, which will be elaborated on later in the text.  

Within the state of Myanmar, it cannot be denied that the key liberal framework of Power is undermined more so than it is upheld. Power refers to the way that in liberal democracies, efforts are made to define and limit power. This is usually achieved through the use of a written constitution, and also through regular checks and balances, made possible through the concept of separation of powers. Separation of powers refers to how governmental power is split into three branches, namely, the Judiciary, in charge of making judgements and interpreting the law, the Executive, which executes the law, and the Legislative, which amends the law. Myanmar is a bicameral parliament, like Australia, which means it is split into two 'houses' that check each other. The lower house, or House of People's Representatives, creates laws and bills, whilst the upper house, or House of Nationalities carefully examines the drafts and executes them. This is an example of power being upheld in the nation. Myanmar also currently uses a constitution, namely the 2008 Burmese Constitution, which limits parliamentary powers and clearly defines and outlines the powers of the two chambers in the Burmese Parliament. However, despite these efforts to enhance the democratic aspect of Power, the 2008 Constitution was scripted by the military, and awards the military extra powers, essentially outlining a dictatorship. This tie into both legitimacy (as the military does not have the support of the majority of people) and justice (as the military is seen as being above the law, breaking the rule of law). This exemplifies the way that Myanmar undermines the liberal framework of power more so than it upholds it.  

In Myanmar, the standards required to constitute a legitimate government are not met. Legitimacy refers to the authority that a country's government has to rule said country. Essentially, the government must be supported to a high degree by a majority of people. This can be shown in multiple ways, i.e., through showcasing equal and free votes, having an independent overseer in elections, allowing all citizens the right to run for office, and last but not least, demonstrating a predictable pattern of elections. Within the current electoral system of Myanmar, we see that free and equal vote is mostly present, with the secret ballot system, and all votes being worth the same and being anonymous. However, through examining the case of the Rohingya people groups of the Rakhine state, we see that legitimacy is not as upheld. The Rohingya people are not given the right to vote, as they are not officially recognised as citizens and rather as temporary residents or illegal refugees. They are also not awarded the right to run for office. In fact, in every election as of today, not a single candidate was a follower of the Islamic faith. On a more general perspective, elections are irregular and not trustworthy. Moreover, the elections are not enough to change the party in power, as more than half of the seats in parliament are already allocated to the military. Therefore, using these examples as evidence, it can be stated that Myanmar does not uphold the liberal framework of legitimacy.  

In Myanmar, the framework of Justice is not as clearly demonstrated through the actions of the nation’s government. As mentioned earlier, Rule of Law is the idea that no one is above or below the law. We see that this is not the case in the Burmese government, as the military junta has a strong hold over both the constitution and the common law. In fact, the current constitution was scripted by the military in 2008 and ensures that the military always remains in power. The other main aspect of justice is, as stated before, the right to a fair trial. It can be said that this aspect was undermined in Myanmar through the example of the case of Wa Lone and Kyaw Soe Oo, two Burmese journalists. They were found guilty of entering prohibited places, taking images, and obtaining secret documents that may be useful to enemies. However, the two journalists both say that they were handed the documents by the police. Whilst clear evidence of their claims was given, the Court sentenced both of them into 7 years of hard labour, which was cut short when President Win Myint pardoned them as part of a mass amnesty. Despite the pardon, this case highlights the injustice present within the courts of Myanmar. The judges did not listen to Wa Lone and Kyaw Soe Oo when coming to their initial verdict, and instead sentenced them to a severe punishment. Using these examples, it is safe to say that Justice is undermined in Myanmar more than it is upheld.  

As we can see from these clear cases, by focusing on the key liberal frameworks - which are vital to a liberal democracy - of Justice, Legitimacy, and Power, and through the analysis of such examples as the case involving two journalists who reported on a massacre, namely, Wa Lone and Kyaw Soe Oo, as well as taking into account the more prominent and pressing Rohingya Crisis and Genocide, we can clearly say that whilst certain aspects of the aforementioned frameworks are upheld, Myanmar’s transition to democracy has been halted through the undermining of the frameworks evaluated in this text, further supporting the claim that Myanmar does not uphold the key liberal frameworks to the same extent as it undermines them. Therefore, we can say that the government, which has been mainly run by the military since the coup d’état in 1962 and 2021, does not perform to the standard that is required for a democratic nation. However, advancing towards these fundamental frameworks through solving these current issues would enhance the state of democracy in modern-day Myanmar.  
