<head>
    <title>Yr9 BioCat Val</title>
</head>
<body>
    <h1 class="title">Science</h1>
    <h2>Biology CAT Validation Notes</h2>
    <h2><em>The Effect of Solute Concentration on Osmosis in Potato Cells</em></h2>
    <h3>My Discussion</h3>
    <p>The aim of this experiment was to evaluate the effect of different solute concentrations on the rate of osmosis in potato cells. The aim was assessed by submerging potato cores in solutions of various concentrations overnight and recording the initial and final mass, which was then used to find the percentage change. <br> From both the table and the graph (fig. 1) we can see that the initial hypothesis, As the solution’s concentration increases, the percentage change in the weight of the potato will decrease, is supported through the results collected. As clearly shown in the graph, the percentage change gradually dropped, showing a clear downwards trend. <br> A possible reasoning for this is that as the glucose amount in the solution gradually increases, there will be less water for the potato cells to absorb, thereby decreasing the final mass. This notion is supported through the fact that when the solvent’s concentration increases, the solute concentration decreases, and vice versa. Osmosis is the net movement of molecules across a semi-permeable membrane (Osmosis - Definition and Examples, 2023), and is a type of diffusion. Diffusion being defined as the net movement of molecules from a region of high concentration to one of a lower concentration, also known as going with the concentration gradient (Diffusion, 2019). Osmosis differs from regular diffusion in the sense that osmosis always occurs through a semipermeable membrane, in this case, the potato cells (Knittle CA 1and CA2 April 23rd, n.d.). On the other hand, diffusion can occur in any mixture between any membrane (Helmenstine, 2020). Another key term is tonicity, or the ability of a solution to make water move in or out of a cell (Osmosis and Tonicity, n.d.), is important to look at when considering this experiment. <br> There are three different words used when describing tonicity and comparing the tonicity of different solutions. These are hypotonic, hypertonic, and isotonic. Hypotonic solutions are when one solution has a lower concentration than another solution (Lopez & Hall, Physiology, Osmosis, 2023). Hypertonic solutions, on the other hand, have higher solute concentrations than another solution (Hypertonic Solutions, n.d.). Isotonic solutions contain the same concentration of solutes as one another (Kaiser, Merrywell, Fang, & Larive, 2008). All solutions tend towards isotonicity, which they achieve through osmosis and diffusion. The tendency of solutions towards isotonicity is an example of Homeostasis in the body. Using this information, we can confidently infer that within our experiment, the solutions that the potato cores were dissolved in were mostly hypotonic in relation to the potato cores themselves, as the solution drew out the water from the potato cores, leading to the results that we recorded, i.e. the percentage change going into the negatives (meaning the final mass was less than the initial mass). This notion is supported by the fact that as the concentration of glucose in the solution increased, the potato lost more mass, as more water was needed to balance out the glucose content of the solution. This explains the negative percentage change for when the potato core cells were submerged in a solution of more than 0.5 mol L-1. For example, when the solution’s concentration was 0.5 mol L-1, the percentage change overnight was -23.34%. This dropped significantly when the potato core was immersed in a solution with concentration 0.75 mol L-1, with the percentage change being -37.77%. The aforementioned explanation can also be used to explain the solutions under 0.5 mol L-1, through the inverse. The potato cells gained mass, as the glucose solution needed to remove water to lower the water concentration and thereby equalise the concentration of the glucose and the water. This is shown through the results of potatoes that were soaking in solutions with concentrations of 0 mol L-1 and 0.25 mol L-1. The potatoes that were saturated in these concentrations had +1.11% and +2.22% change, respectively. As seen in Figure 2, Hypertonic plant cells shrivel, which is what happened with potatoes at solutions greater than 0.5molL-1. Conversely, potatoes with solutions lower than 0.5molL-1 appeared to be hypotonic, drawing in more water than they received. No potatoes were isotonic. <br> The three main things to consider when assessing an experiment are reliability, validity, and accuracy. In terms of reliability, it can be said that the experiment was reliable. Three trials were conducted for each solution level, and two outliers were detected, which was removed before averaging the results. Therefore, one can confidently predict that if any future experiments were conducted, the results would be quite similar. To maintain a valid experiment, many factors were taken into consideration. All equipment were the same when measuring masses, and each potato was sized similarly. The potatoes all had the same surface area, and the data points were evenly spaced out. The scope could have been more varied, in the sense that the higher extreme of the solution (i.e., 1 mol L-1 Glucose Concentration) was not assessed. Despite this, the data can be used to make predictions regarding the original aim, as the results were quite conclusive. In terms of accuracy, the experiment could be improved quite a bit. Firstly, as the experiment was split between two different groups, and both groups had slightly different interpretations of how to conduct the method, an issue of how consistently the solutions were set up and the results were collected arises. This may have led to a miscalculation in terms of accuracy. However, since both the validity and the reliability of this experiment is quite high, we can say that this experiment was well thought out and is, in general, a good experiment. <br> As the experiment has not been perfected as of right now, there are multiple ways to improve this experiment. Some of these include standardising the size of the potato core slices to ensure that they all have similar surface areas, and using equipment that is more precise (as at the time of the experiment, the scales had an error factor of ±0.1g, which would have affected the weight of potato cores significantly). Another method to rid the experiment of the equipment’s error factor would be to increase the size of the potato cores, to the point at which the error factor is not a prevalent issue. However, this would lead to multiple potatoes having to be used, which ultimately leads to more error, as not all potatoes are created equal. Additionally, in practice, it would have been more stable for the experiment to be carried out by one group, due to the difference in how the method was interpreted being different.</p>
    <h3>Definitions</h3>
    <def><abbr>Concentration</abbr> The amount of a substance in a certain volume of a solution.</def>
    <def><abbr>Solute</abbr> The substance that is dissolved.</def>
    <def><abbr>Solvent</abbr> The substance in which the solute dissolves.</def>
    <def><abbr>Solution</abbr> A homogenous mixture of two or more substances.</def>
    <def><abbr>Homogenous Mixture</abbr> A mixture where the substances are evenly distributed throughout the solvent.</def>
    <def><abbr>Concentration Gradient</abbr> A difference in the concentration of a substance from one location to another.</def>
    <def><abbr>Diffusion</abbr> The movement of particles from an area of high concentration to an area of low concentration.</def>
</body>
